---
title: To Belarus and Ukraine by train
---

After having travelled to Brussels and back by train by day trains, I decided I wanted something bigger and, since I planned to travel to Belarus to see my hundred years old great grandmother anyway, I decided to go by train, for the first time in two years.

Since when I moved to Slovakia in 2011, I mostly travelled between the two countries by train, occasionally going by car if my father was planning to go along the route or, rarely until 2018, flying. I preferred trains to car because while going by car could be slightly faster, it was much more tiring even considering that I didn’t have to drive, and going through the border checks at Polish-Belarusian border was enormously slow because of the huge numbers of people trying to smuggle cheap cigarettes or LCD TVs either way.

I flew rarely for a simple reason: price. A return flight from Vienna, the closest airport with direct connection to Minsk, would cost me more than €500 when I last checked. A much cheaper alternative, about €180, would involve changing flights in Riga, Latvia, and taking a train from Vilnius, Lithuania to Minsk. The flight from Riga would often arrive to Vilnius too late, so I’d miss my last train to Minsk and need to stay in Vilnius overnight. On my way back, the flight would depart too early (e.g. 7 am), so I would have to take the train a day before and sleep in Vilnius too.

In February 2018, I went to FOSDEM and was supposed to fly from there to Riga, Vilnius and take a train to Minsk to attend the winter session of [LVEE](https://lvee.org/). Unfortunately, a couple of hours before my flight my bag was stolen from a restaurant in the centre of Brussels, *Le petite Bruxelles*. Not being able to travel, since my passport was in the bag, I had to stay in Brussels for two more days, get a temporary travel document at the Belarusian embassy and somehow go to Minsk for a new passport. I had very few things of mine, so instead of flying to Minsk directly, I took an overnight bus to Prague and a train from there to Bratislava. Finally, home, but how do I travel to Minsk and back without being forced to get a visa (my residence permit was also in the stolen bag)? After a bit of research I managed to find a Belavia flight from Prague to Minsk for ‘just’ €200 return: flying back to Prague from Minsk would allow me to enter without a visa but a confirmation of my residence written in Slovak, which is mutually intelligible (and officially recognised by law) with Czech.

Four hours by a [RegioJet](https://regiojet.sk/) train to Prague, and hour hand a half of flying — and I’m in Minsk! Well, almost: a bus from the airport takes about an hour to arrive, and departs each half an hour. In Prague, the airport is also in an hour of a bus journey, plus security checks and waiting.
